what significance would it have if I
were to tell you that there is a method
of paying attention to your breathing as
the air enters and exits your nose that
is scientifically proven to have the
result of helping you memorize a list of
16 numbers and to then repeat them back
to the person who has said them to you I
think that the vast majority of people
would say well that's a completely
trivial scientific finding and why on
earth would anyone have done the
research a minority of people who are
maybe interested in the philosophy of
Education might instead say well that's
interesting for a start but if people
improve their um cognitive ability in
memorizing a list of numbers after being
given instructions on paying attention
to their breath and furgoneta sitting
there knows how does that compare to
paying attention to the end of a pencil
how does that compare to some other
educational method if the purpose is to
train people to be able to do certain
meaningless tasks like memorize a list
of numbers so you perform well on
cognitive behavior tests what is the
most effective method what gets the most
dramatic results now if you know
anything about the history of science
you can get dramatic improvements in how
people perform on tests of this kind by
for example administering cocaine
doesn't mean cocaine is good for you in
the interwar years after World War one
there were military experiments and some
people in the military were delighted
with how well men-at-arms seemed to
respond to being given say a teaspoon of
cocaine
and suddenly they're shell-shocked in
their fear of battle and their sense of
exhaustion and demoralization all
disappeared and not only were they alert
and well behaved as soldiers but they
suddenly had renewed energy to march
long distances until now
cocaine was at that time a very new and
not widely understood drug and inspired
many crazy theories today nobody would
describe cocaine as seriously having
positive cognitive benefits however we
can't Lee say that those early
evaluations of cocaine wore evaluations
just driven by a scientific interest in
what the outcomes really were the
reality is that when I look at someone
like Sam Harris who is allegedly a
skeptic but who is not skeptical at all
when he applies his mind to Buddhism and
meditation on the contrary I regard him
as the lowest order of cult flunky in
this respect um unlike even a scientist
investigating cocaine in say the 1920s
or 1930s he's not sincerely interested
in the scientific content of these
findings nor is he sincerely interested
in the history of the religion I find
that very sad
I find it even more sad to see the fans
of sam harris or supposedly people drawn
together by some kind of critical
response to religion in the modern world
I find it very sad to see the excuses
they're making for their their hero on
this topic now I'm gonna make a big
concession here I think that mythology
can really be meaningful I think it can
be very meaningful in people's lives I
often use the example of Shakespeare
I've met people I'm actually not one of
them Shakespeare doesn't mean much to me
but I've met people for whom reading
Shakespeare is
a tremendously important and meaningful
part of their identity for whom it's
almost a religion in an old-fashioned
sense I think you can look at a legend
from Buddhist tradition of mythological
account and at a minimum I think we
should all be able to agree as atheists
as nihilists or as religious people that
a legend of that kind can be meaningful
in the same way that Shakespeare can be
meaningful that mythology can play an
important role in life in the 21st
century even when we simply recognize
that it is mythology that we don't
presume it has supernatural powers we
don't presume for example that by
chanting the text we can bring about
some kind of magical change in the world
but with this concession haven't been
stated I think we must have the utmost
skepticism true rigorous scientific
skepticism when someone makes a claim
about the the cognitive effects of
having a group of 63 university students
who say they're interested in meditation
focus on their own breathing and follow
some other instructions of that kind and
we then construct a report a seemingly
scientific report saying that this
proves the value of a Buddhist
meditation as having positive cognitive
effects it is only in the context of a
certain sort of echo of the religious
tradition that people would construe
that scientific finding as having some
sort of deeper and broader meaning
having just read the actual lab report
the actual peer-reviewed medical
publication that sam harris cites as as
proving that in the site meditation of
the passing of meditation from tera
vaada buddhism improve
cognitive function I see so many serious
errors in reasoning in in construing
what the results are what their
significance is and you know Sam Harris
seems to be the victim of the worst kind
of california-based Buddhism in that he
has been completely guileless completely
defenseless in accepting modern lies
about what the ancient religion is and
how the religion found in the Pali Canon
relates to what both scientific and not
so scientific peddlers of the faith or
are calling capacity' sam harris on his
blog and in his book waking up he
completely uncritically claims that
these meditative practices are
representative of the most ancient and
authentic form of Buddhism of terabyte
of Buddhism he gives his own set of
meditation instructions it's a list of
nine points and he thinks that this
along with the different isolated words
he takes from from Pali appear in the
Pali Canon so if you don't know Polly is
the name of a language the Pali Canon is
a corpus of ancient Buddhist texts
really the text we talk about here are
the suit of attack the collected sayings
of the Buddha or whatever you want to
call it
I don't know why I mean if you're a fan
of Sam Harris if you appreciate what the
guy has done in taking a sort of
historically critical view of Islam
Judaism and Christianity you should be
hurt by this and say why has he so
totally failed to take a similarly
critical historical view of Buddhism and
specifically of Buddhist meditation the
claims he makes about Vipassana are
completely false the claims he makes
about breathing meditation are
completely false if you do a google
search for my name plus breathing
meditation you'll find a shocking
article in which I discuss what the
ancient texts actually say about
breathing meditation and Buddhism that's
one of my articles that sent shockwaves
around the world although asthma damage
a clean affiliate said to me she had
always been aware of this because of her
own background in Sanskrit and
what-have-you there were definitely
people who read those texts primary
source texts who had the skills in poly
or Sanskrit of both who did not find
what I was saying surprising but people
who are the victims of this kind of
mainstream packaged Buddhist meditation
experience they definitely were shocked
in general the people who promote veep
asana as some ancient oath entick form
of Buddhism they have to deal with the
reality that in the ancient texts he
does not exist at all it's a totally
false and fictional claim to say that
this is the form of meditation that the
Buddha taught or even the Buddha has a
fictional character in the suit of
attacker that in these texts that this
is something the book did not true at
all and it's also partly based on a
misunderstanding of the meaning of the
word if he pass enough frankly not going
to get into detail or many other
doctrinal elements of Buddhism that are
totally misunderstood by sam harris and
that he simply he never even did sort of
a google search on he never looked at
what's available in the english-language
academic literature on Buddhism
much less did he do original research
you take the time to talk to somebody
who would really have have expertise in
this area now why does all that matter
if Sam Harris's claim is that there is
an intrinsic value to meditative
practice denuded of its religious
attributes so the the claim sam Harris
would have us believe is that you can
extract these meditative practices from
Buddhism regard them as scientifically
valid and they still have meaning well I
really think nobody could take that
seriously if they look in a detached way
at the scientific literature and you
know as I open this video by asking what
is the meaning of paying attention to
your breath as it goes into your nose
and out of your nose what is the
significance of that and why would that
be a more significant pedagogical tool
than an ideal of Education taken from
ancient Greece or ancient China ancient
Rome or a brand new idea developed
through really scientific methods for
what helps people perform these
cognitive tasks better so the actual you
know when you go through the footnotes
when you read the fine print on what the
so called mindfulness training is it's
revealed as something that is
meaningless something that has
absolutely no scriptural authority no
religious authenticity so that is a
completely modern 20th century invention
not part of nature Buddhism and then on
the other hand the tests being performed
to show changes in cognitive ability
those are also meaningless so it can
only be in the context of somebody
seeking to validate a prior religious
conceit a prior religious belief it's
only in that context
that this would be meaningful now I
would put you the proposal if paying
attention to your breath going in out of
your nose has this effect maybe paying
attention while drawing a picture maybe
learning to shoot basketball hoops maybe
going to the gym maybe singing in a
church choir and learning but through
listening how to analyze the different
notes and registers getting really good
at performing in a choir or some of the
theory behind music maybe those things
also would have the type of very modest
statistical change in your ability to
perform these these tasks these tasks
that have considered us metrics for
supposed improvements in cognitive
behavior I citizen of just been looking
at the real the scientific studies on us
and of course my perspective on this is
partly skewed because I'm aware of the
long history of pseudoscience funded by
supported by groups like TM the
transcendental transmittal meditation
group you know and the reality is that
the journal sent the journals but
consciousness and cognition as a journal
for example at Sam Harris relies on hold
the journal itself has a bias yes this
is peer-reviewed but this is a journal
that's almost totally devoted to
promoting this type of theory so sorry
if you have experienced that peer review
works you know if you publish something
in a Journal of Catholic studies it's
not going to be very surprising that you
pass peer review with a thesis that is
you know flattering to the interests of
the editors of that journal so the peer
review is not an objective standard
it's an intersubjective standard and it
is mostly a method of censorship not a
method of scientific verification
I wish it work I wish it were but peer
review is is what it is so from my
perspective Sam Harris is in a sort of
EE damn situation here what he says
about Buddhist meditation is totally
invalid from the perspective of Buddhism
and only shows the terrible ignorance of
Sam Harris about Buddhism he does not
know what he's talking about in the
least and you know that in itself is
really depressing the cult if you do
know something what ISM if you do care
about the history of Buddhism although
in my case I'm a secular outside
observer at this point I'm a former
scholar of Pali the ancient canonical
language it is what it is but connected
to that is a deep sense of denialism
fundamentally cult-like and unscientific
and unprofessional in which he's
misrepresenting completely modern
innovations mindfulness based stress
reduction MBSR pioneered by Jon
kabat-zinn he's misrepresenting this as
if yet were validated by a rose from
represented ancient Buddhist tradition
now if it doesn't if we're just looking
at these modern meditation cults if
we're just analyzing them as phenomena
of modern religion then they stand on
the same level as something like
Scientology now I cannot tell you as an
objective scientific fact that nothing
the Scientologists do get positive
results a significant part of what
Scientology does for people is basically
ripped off of
modern psychotherapy they sit down and
talk to people about their dreams they
talk to people about their problems they
talk to people about their prior
incarnations they talk to people about
their feelings I think inevitably that
probably has some kind of positive
benefit that's measurable scientifically
it probably has a positive cognitive
benefit as well as an emotional benefit
as well as relieving anxiety and
depression but Scientology is bad and
evil and immoral and wrong and yeah I
would be horrified to see someone doing
exactly what Sam Harris does here for
Scientology why is it that the fans of
Sam Harris are so uncritical and do not
feel horrified at all to see their
supposedly secular supposedly skeptical
leader endorsing the lowest grade of
modern white Western pseudo Buddhism
would it be better if he engage with
real Buddhism my answer is yes I think
that if his engagement with Buddhism if
Sam Harris was engaged with the reality
of what it's like to be a small-town
Buddhist monk performing funeral rituals
in Cambodia I think that would be
meaningful even if you know the
engagement was completely critical even
if he saw nothing of value in the life
of a village monk who performs funeral
rituals Sam Harris has just become
another mainstream media flunky to put
the stamp of approval on so called the
passion of meditation out of his own
complete ignorance the real history of
the Posada arises I mean that the single
most influential figure is actually not
SN Goenka if maja C SIA da
from Myanmar mohassess Ayodhya was
really the guy who made the leap into
the English language with promoting this
idea maja Seaside AHS ideas about
meditation were 100% modern 100%
original 100% new and they did not have
the objective of helping you to memorize
a list of sixteen numbers this death is
deeply problematic the cognitive claims
being made for the effects of Buddhist
meditation have absolutely no
relationship to what the outcomes are
supposed to be in the religion now I
don't want this video we're going to
much longer but again we have a kind of
double deception if I'm so Sam Harris
then I am lying to you about what
meditation is in Buddhism I'm lying to
you about what modern meditation
practices are unlined you about what
they are supposed to accomplish what the
promised benefits are what the
objectives of the method are and that
also um I'm lying to you fundamentally
in claiming that this is a
scientifically valid enterprise that I'm
engaged in when in reality everything
he's doing is departing from and
concluding with a religious tradition
that he himself doesn't understand and
is trying to validate it for a modern
reading audience by claiming that it's
going to have medical benefits that are
if you actually read the peer-reviewed
articles extremely marginal marginal at
best
perhaps comparable to getting a gym
membership you know in terms of an apart
from being marginal they are profoundly
irrelevant to both the practice being
they're taken there were relevance to
spending hours of your life paying
attention to your breath as it goes into
your nose and out of your novels and
they're also totally irrelevant to the
mythological tradition and the
philosophical tradition of Buddhism
let's be honest if there's something
that makes Buddhism worth talking about
today it's the philosophy and you can
look into what those texts actually say
about so called breathing meditation you
can look into what the text actually say
about so-called the passing on and
really if you want to know about
meditation you should be looking into
jhana jha na jhana is really meditation
of the ancient provision yeah you can
look at those things but I mean no
nobody in their right mind would start a
discourse of this kind by saying hey you
know what I bet if we get a bunch of
university students and pay them to take
place too sorry and pay them to
participate in a scientific trial we can
get them to perform better on cognitive
ability tests by having them spend hours
paying attention to the sound of their
own breathing the nature of the claim
and the assumption that it proves
something worthwhile is profoundly
problematic and I think it's irrelevant
to all of the questions about Buddhism
in the 21st century that are really
worth asking and that you might have
hoped and intellectual like sam harris
would engage in the same way that he
engages with real problems in
christianity and islam